---
title: CS101 PA [3]
description: This is the first post of my new Astro blog.
published: 2024-01-26 10:38:42
tags:
  - CS110
  - Algorithm
  - STU
  - CS
category: Course Assignment
---


注意：本学期 CS101 PA 的所有 C++ 代码都采用 C++20 标准。如果您使用 GCC 或 Clang，您需要在编译时设置 `-std=c++20` 。

<!--more-->

如果您看到类似这样的报错

```
g++-9: error: unrecognized command line option ‘-std=c++20’; did you mean ‘-std=c++2a’?
```

说明您的编译器版本过低，请安装更高版本的编译器。目前 GCC 13 几乎已经将 C++20 除 modules 外的全部新特性实现完毕，我们推荐使用 GCC 13。

# Problem 1. Master of Linear Algebra

There are $m$ vectors $\bm v_i(i=1,\cdots,m)$ in $\R^n$, where each vector $\bm v_i$ has a **value** $c_i$. Each vector $\bm v_i$ consists of only a consecutive interval of standard basis vectors $\bm{e}_{l_i}\dots \bm e_{r_i}$. In other words, there exist $1\le l_i\le r_i\le n$ such that $\bm v_i = \bm e_{l_i} + \bm e_{l_i+1} + \bm e_{l_i+2} + \dots + \bm e_{r_i}$, i.e.

$$
\bm v_i = (0,\cdots,0,\underbrace{1,\cdots,1}_{\text{from }l_i\text{ to }r_i},0,\cdots,0).
$$

It means that the $l_i$-th entry to $r_i$-th entry of $\bm v_i$ are $1$, and others are $0$.

Now your task is to select a linearly independent subset $S$ of vectors $\bm v_i$, maximizing the sum of the value (the $c_i$'s) of the selected vectors.

- Linear independence: The vectors $\bm v_1,\bm v_2,\cdots,\bm v_m$ are said to be **linearly independent** if there do not exist scalars $a_1,\cdots,a_m$, which are not all zero, such that

  $$
  \sum_{i=1}^ma_i\bm v_i = \bm 0.
  $$

## Input format 

The first line contains two integers $m,n$ separated by space, denoting there are $m$ vectors $(1\le m \le 600000, 1\le n\le 200000)$.

Then follow $m$ lines, the $i$-th of which contains 3 integers $l_i, r_i, c_i$ separated by space, denoting the $i$-th vector is $\bm v_i=\sum_{j=l_i}^{r_i}\bm e_j$ and has value $c_i(1\le c_i\le 10^9)$.

It is guaranteed that for any $1\le i,j\le n$ and $i\neq j$, either $l_i\neq l_j$ or $r_i\neq r_j$ holds. 

## Output format

Output an integer denoting the maximum sum of values of linearly independent vectors.

## Examples

### Input 1

```
6 4
1 1 10
2 3 15
4 4 5
3 4 30
2 4 21
2 2 31
```

### Output 1

```
86
```

### Sample 1 Explanation

The vectors are

$$
\begin{aligned}
\bm v_1&=(1,0,0,0),\\
\bm v_2&=(0,1,1,0),\\
\bm v_3&=(0,0,0,1),\\
\bm v_4&=(0,0,1,1),\\
\bm v_5&=(0,1,1,1),\\
\bm v_6&=(0,1,0,0).
\end{aligned}
$$

Choose four vectors $\left\{\bm v_1,\bm v_2,\bm v_4,\bm v_6\right\}$. The answer is $10 + 15 + 30 + 31 = 86$.

### Input 2

```
18 12
5 7 747599713
3 4 757926887
3 6 382811701
4 6 97461676
4 9 710404753
2 9 487547197
2 6 596396727
2 2 608843003
4 4 845337000
4 7 18671691
11 11 135958130
11 12 452842130
1 12 528936929
1 5 812188014
6 8 535007878
12 12 617497619
9 12 737458124
6 12 583189872
```

### Output 2

```
7469683842
```

### Sample 2 Explanation

Choose 11 vectors $\left\{\bm v_1,\bm v_2,\bm v_5,\bm v_7,\bm v_8,\bm v_9,\bm v_{12},\bm v_{14},\bm v_{16},\bm v_{17},\bm v_{18}\right\}$.

# Problem 2. VCG auction

$n$ buyers want to compete for $m$ items through auction.

The $i$-th buyer wants to buy $c_i$ items at a price for $v_i$. Note that $v_i$ also means the $i$-th buyer's **valuation** of the items.

The VCG auction allocates the $m$ items which maximize the sum of the valuations of those who get $c_i$ items as he/she wants.

- $V=(v_1,v_2,...,v_n)$;
- $C=(c_1,c_2,...,c_n)$;
- $\operatorname{VA}(V,C)=\left\{A\in2^{\{1,2,...,n\}}:\sum\limits_{i\in A}c_i\leqslant m\right\}$ , which means the set of all **Valid Allocations** to the $n$ buyers. Valid means that $m$ items are enough to be allocated.
- $\operatorname{MSV}(V,C)=\max\limits_{A\in\operatorname{VA}(V,C)}\sum\limits_{i\in A}v_i$, which means the **Maximal Sum of the Valuations** of those who gets $c_i$ items as he/she wants.
- $A_M(V,C)\in \mathop{\arg\max}\limits_{A\in\operatorname{VA}(V,C)}\sum\limits_{i\in A}v_i$, which means the valid allocation that maximizes the sum of the valuations. The buyers in $A_M(V,C)$ win the auction and get the items they want.
- $V_{-i}=(v_1,v_2,...,v_{i-1},v_{i+1},...,v_n)$, which means excluding $v_i$ from $V$;
- $C_{-i}=(c_1,c_2,...,c_{i-1},c_{i+1},...,c_n)$, which means excluding $c_i$ from $C$;
- $p_i=v_i+\operatorname{MSV}(V_{-i},C_{-i})-\operatorname{MSV}(V,C)$, which is the definition of the **payment** of the $i$-th buyer $i\in A_M(V,C)$ if he/she gets the $c_i$ items.

Your task is to compute $A_M(V,C)$ and their payments. If there is more than one choice of $A_M(V,C)$, please choose the lexicographically least one.

## Input format

The first line contains two positive integers $n$ and $m$, separated by a space.

For the following $n$ lines:

- The $i$-th line contains two positive integers $v_i$ and $c_i$, separated by a space.

## Output format

On the first line, print $A_M(V,C)$ (lexicographically least one). The numbers are separated by spaces.

On the second line, print $p_i$ for all $i\in A_M(V,C)$. The numbers are separated by spaces.

## Testing on OJ

There are 20 testcases on OJ. For the first 10 testcases, your program (assuming it is named `foo.cc`) is compiled with

```
g++ foo.cc -o foo -std=c++20 -Wall -Wpedantic -Wextra -Werror -DONLINE_JUDGE -fmax-errors=3 -fdiagnostics-color=always -fsanitize=undefined -fsanitize=address -g
```

For testcases 11 ~ 20, your program is compiled with

```
g++ foo.cc -o foo -std=c++20 -Wall -Wpedantic -Wextra -Werror -DONLINE_JUDGE -fmax-errors=3 -fdiagnostics-color=always -O2
```

Due to the OJ settings, there is no way of running a single testcase in pretest (运行自测). You can enter your input data there and see the output. For pretesting, the program will be compiled with the same command as for the first 10 testcases.

## Data constraints

- $1\leqslant n,m\leqslant 6000$.
- $1\leqslant v_i\leqslant 10^9, 1\leqslant c_i\leqslant m$.

If you implement your algorithm in $\Theta(n^2m)$ time, you will receive about 50 pts.

If you implement your algorithm in $\Theta(nm)$ time, you will receive about 100 pts.


## Examples

### Input 1

```
2 2
2 1
3 2
```

### Output 1

```
2
2
```

### Explanation 1

- $v_1=2,c_1=1$;
- $v_2=3,c_2=2$;
- $\operatorname{MSV}(V,C)=3,A_M(V,C)=\{2\}$;
- $\operatorname{MSV}(V_{-2},C_{-2})=2,A_M(V_{-2},C_{-2})=\{1\},p_2=3+2-3=2$.

### Input 2

```
4 4
1 1
2 2
3 3
2 2
```

### Output 2

```
1 3
1 3
```

### Explanation 2

- $v_1=1,c_1=1$;
- $v_2=2,c_2=2$;
- $v_3=3,c_1=3$;
- $v_4=2,c_2=2$;
- $\operatorname{MSV}(V,C)=4,A_M(V,C)\in\{\ \{1,3\},\ \{2,4\}\}$, choose the lexicographically least one $\{1,3\}$
- $\operatorname{MSV}(V_{-1},C_{-1})=4,A_M(V_{-1},C_{-1})=\{2,4\},p_1=1+4-4=1$;
- $\operatorname{MSV}(V_{-3},C_{-3})=4,A_M(V_{-3},C_{-3})=\{2,4\},p_3=3+4-4=3$.


# Problem 3. Shortest path

This problem consists of three subtasks: the Bellman-Ford algorithm, the Dijkstra's algorithm, and the difference constraints problem.

**Please go to Piazza Resources to download the related materials first.**

## The `Graph` class

`graph.hpp` is a header file defining a `Graph` class that represents a **directed, edge-weighted** graph $G=(V,E)$ using adjacency lists. For simplicity, we assume that $V=\{0,1,\cdots,n-1\}$ and that the edge weights are integers. Considering that you might have not written any graph-related code before, we have implemented two basic functions for you as demonstration:

- The Breadth-First Search algorithm, which has the following signature

  ```cpp
  void bfs(VertexID start, std::invocable<VertexID> auto callback) const;
  ```

  `start` is the id of the vertex where the traversal begins. `callback` is a callable object that is called every time a vertex is visited. For example, the following code (see `examples/graph_example.cpp`) performs BFS on the graph `graph` and prints the id of the visited vertices in order.

  ```cpp
  graph.bfs(0, [](auto x) { std::cout << x << ' '; });
  ```

- The naive $O\left(V^2\right)$ Dijkstra's algorithm, which has the following signature

  ```cpp
  std::vector<Weight> dijkstra(VertexID source) const;
  ```

  `source` is the id of the source vertex. This function returns a `std::vector<Weight>`, in which the element indexed `i` is the length of the shortest path from `source` to the vertex `i`, or `Graph::infinity` if no path exists.

  The behavior is undefined if there exists an edge with negative weight.

  > By saying "the behavior is undefined", we mean that **you don't need to care about this case**. Do not waste your effort detecting it.

  The implementation of this function is in `graph.cpp`, which you need to overwrite (See [below](#subtask-2-the-dijkstra-algorithm)).

Read through the code we have provided in `graph.cpp`, `graph.hpp` and `examples/graph_example.cpp` and make sure you have understood the design. To compile and run `graph_example.cpp`, refer to [compile and run](#compile-and-run).

**Note: Your submission will not contain the contents in `graph.hpp`. Any modification to that file (e.g. adding a member to the class `Graph`) will have no effect.**

## Subtask 1: The Bellman-Ford algorithm

First, you need to implement the Bellman-Ford algorithm that calculates the length of the shortest path from a given source vertex to each vertex, or reports that there is a negative cycle reachable from `source`. It is a member function of `Graph` that has the following signature

```cpp
std::optional<std::vector<Weight>> bellmanFord(VertexID source) const;
```

> [`std::optional<T>`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional) is a special standard library type that represents **either an object of type `T`, or nothing (represented by `std::nullopt`)**. You can refer to `examples/equation.cpp` to see an example of using it.

This function should return `std::nullopt` if the graph contains a negative cycle reachable from `source`. Otherwise, it should return a vector of numbers, in which the element indexed `i` is the length of the shortest path from `source` to the vertex `i`, or `Graph::infinity` if no path exists. This function should run in $O(VE)$ time with $O(V)$ extra space.

Write your implementation in `graph.cpp`.

## Subtask 2: The Dijkstra's algorithm

In `graph.cpp`, there is an implementation of the naive Dijkstra's algorithm whose time complexity is $O\left(V^2\right)$. Suppose now the graph is not so dense, or more specifically, $E=o\left(V^2/\log V\right)$. Overwrite this function to make it run within $O(E\log V)$ time, with $O(V)$ extra space.

You may need [`std::priority_queue`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/priority_queue). We have provided two examples of using it: `examples/priqueue.cpp` and `examples/huffman.cpp`. The latter is a program that computes the Huffman codes given the frequencies of characters.

> By default, `std::priority_queue<T>` uses `std::less<T>` (which is `operator<`) to compare elements and models a **max-heap**. If you need a min-heap, just pass `std::greater<>` as the third template argument (see details in the examples).
> 
> We have seen some inexperienced students overload `operator<` to do the work that should have been done by `operator>` (e.g. `return lhs.something > rhs.something;`), or pass negated values to the max-heap to *fake* a min-heap. **You should never do that.**

## Subtask 3: System of difference constraints

In a ***system of difference constraints*** (or, ***difference constraints problem***), there are $n$ variables $x_0,x_1,\cdots,x_{n-1}$ and $m$ constraints on these variables, where the $k$-th constraint ($0\leqslant k<m$) is of the form

$$
x_{u_k}-x_{v_k}\leqslant c_k
$$

where $0\leqslant u_k,v_k<n$, and $u_k\neq v_k$. We want to find a solution to the given difference constraints problem, that is, to assign the variables with values so that all the constraints are satisfied.

For example, the following is a system of difference constraints with $5$ variables and $8$ constraints:

$$
\begin{aligned}
  x_0-x_1&\leqslant 0,\\
  x_0-x_4&\leqslant -1,\\
  x_1-x_4&\leqslant 1,\\
  x_2-x_0&\leqslant 5,\\
  x_3-x_0&\leqslant 4,\\
  x_3-x_2&\leqslant -1,\\
  x_4-x_2&\leqslant -3,\\
  x_4-x_3&\leqslant -3.
\end{aligned}
$$

One solution to this problem is $\left(x_0,x_1,x_2,x_3,x_4\right)=(-5,-3,0,-1,-4)$, which you can verify directly by checking each inequality. Note that a system of difference constraints usually have infinitely many solutions, but some systems may have no solutions at all. The following is a system with $3$ variables and $3$ constraints that have no solutions:

$$
\begin{aligned}
  x_0-x_1&\leqslant -1,\\
  x_1-x_2&\leqslant -1,\\
  x_2-x_0&\leqslant -1.
\end{aligned}
$$

A system of difference constraints can be modeled as a graph, and then solved by solving a single-source shortest-path problem on the graph. **Read Section 24.4 of *Introduction to Algorithms, Third Edition*** which is available in Piazza Resources.

The difference constraints problem that you need to solve will be presented as the class `Problem` in `problem.hpp`. Read through the code in `problem.hpp` and understand the structure of that class. Note that we have implemented some useful functions for you, such as `hasNegativeConstant()`, `getNumVars()` and `getConstraints()`.

Your task is to implement the `solve` function in `main.cpp`, which has the signature

```cpp
std::optional<Problem::Solution> solve(const Problem &problem);
```

It solves the given difference constraints problem `problem`, and returns the solution to it or `std::nullopt` if it has none. A solution is of type `Problem::Solution` i.e. `std::vector<Problem::Value>` in which the element indexed `i` is the value assigned to the variable $x_i$.

For testcase 1\~5, $c_k$ may be negative, and your algorithm should run within $O\left(n^2+nm\right)$ time. For testcase 6\~10, $c_k$ are non-negative, and your algorithm should run within $O((n+m)\log n)$ time.

## Compile and run

### Basic knowledge

Read {% post_link CS101/Compile-Basics Compile Basics%} if you need.

### Compile multiple files

The functions `Graph::dijkstra` and `Graph::bellmanFord` are defined in `graph.cpp`. Therefore, every time you compile a program that calls those functions, `graph.cpp` should be compiled and linked as well. You will see an error like

```
/usr/bin/ld: /tmp/ccxICQ7U.o: in function `main':
graph_example.cpp:(.text+0x15e): undefined reference to `Graph::dijkstra(unsigned long) const'
collect2: error: ld returned 1 exit status
```

if you did not link them correctly. The simplest way is to also pass the path to `graph.cpp` as an argument to the compiler. For example, to compile `solve.cpp`, `cd` to the directory `attachments` first, and then

```shell
g++ solve.cpp graph.cpp -o solve -std=c++20
```

To compile `examples/graph_example.cpp`: If the current working directory is `attachments`,

```
g++ examples/graph_example.cpp graph.cpp -o examples/graph_example -std=c++20
```

This will generate an executable named `graph_example` (`graph_example.exe` on Windows) in the directory `attachments/examples`. If the current working directory is `attachments/examples`,

```
g++ graph_example.cpp ../graph.cpp -o graph_example -std=c++20
```

will do the same thing.

> It is so annoying to enter such a long command every time! You can press `↑` to obtain your command history.

### VSCode configurations

Read [VSCodeConfig.md](VSCodeConfig.md) if you need.

## Submission

Create a zip file `submission.zip` containing `graph.cpp` and `solve.cpp`, and then submit `submission.zip` to the OJ. You can `cd` to `attachments`, and then run the following command to create it:

```
zip -r submission.zip graph.cpp solve.cpp
```

Note that the files `graph.cpp` and `solve.cpp` should be placed directly in the zip file.


# 评分

评分由 OJ 分数（60%）和线下 check （40%）两部分构成。线下 check 会在此次作业结束时间之后进行。

注：线下 check 也带有检查学术诚信的含义，当然这不是唯一的手段。如果被认定为抄袭， OJ 的分数也会作废，并且会有惩罚。**特别强调，抄袭来自 generative AI 的代码和抄袭网上的代码是同等处理的，我们建议您在写作业时关闭一切generative AI 工具。**
